#Thomas' thoughts on woman, children and the developing world

##keywords: inclusion, equality, one laptop per child, digital divide, access, job/emancipation/development opportunities 

As Chinn and Fairly have shown in their cross country analysis on digital divide (Chinn and Fairly, 2004) there are not only dramatic geographic differences in accessibility to and user skills of ICT but moreover they pointed out socio-economic and demographic gaps. There is a large group of children, woman, elderly and economically disadvantaged that are or face to be digitally excluded. 
With regard to the growing impact of ITC not only on economic productivity but also in all other fields, such as the cultural, social and political realm, this exclusion forms a serious thread to societies in terms of equality, inclusion and chances of participation.

ITC is no longer restricted to tools that enhance communication. With more and more funding for the ambition to create smart cities and through integration of ICT into ever more objects of everyday life like watches, clothes, fridges - a situation coined with the term internet of things - accessibility and digital literacy decide not only if a person is included into social and cultural life, is employable and more importantly can participate decision making processes within the democratic realm. In other words using and comprehending ICT is about agency and inclusion.

As first evaluations of the project one laptop per child have shown (Christia et al, 2012), access to ICT does not guaranty an automatic improvement of skills, e.g. in the classical educational subjects like math or reading. Access needs to be accompanied by training and education that allows children and other potentially excluded groups to understand the utility and power of the digital devices they hold in their hands.  

The crucial question, next to, how to give as many people and public institutions as possible access to ICT, therefore is, how to address the motivation of a diverse group of people that do not have an affinity for ICT, make them understand the challenges and opportunities of ICT holds for their lives and provide them with an sustainable way to acquire an understanding of the technologies that goes beyond a mere knowledge of how to use the gadgets at hand. 
In other words, how can we enable people of all ages and with various socio-economical backgrounds to overcome the reluctance towards their technological surrounding and lower the threshold to engage and develop a sustainable interests in these gadgets. An interest that is driven by a practical motivation strong enough to encourage them to pass on the knowledge gained to others and pursue group based interest driven projects in which this knowledge is applied. 

Hypothesis: We need to provide a platform that allows for the application of knowledge in practical fields related to the everyday life of people, so that their motivation to learn and teach each other in order to solve a concrete problem is triggered. In that sense an awareness of the powerful practical impact coding skills and a better understanding of ICT can have (economically, socially, culturally, for education and knowledge production) have to be communicated. 

In order to make this tool oriented problem solving approach sustainable, it needs to foster and organize a community that is not only provided with an online peer learning environment but has to accelerated by offline events at which problems to be solve can be negotiated and projects be started and most importantly: people can engage with technology as layman with the fear to fail.
