#LINES ABOUT VISUALIZATION IN THE PROJECT

This research proposal consists of four integrated research areas, research areas in which public-private-civic partnerships (quad-helix) lead to a sharing of expertise and collaborative practices geared at the development of a cutting-edge innovative educational ecosystem that is specific to the (digital) humanities. These research areas are socio-technical in their approach; apart from combining insights from different partners to develop technological solutions (such as an online educational platform), valorize existing and new R&D methodologies (such as design thinking methodologies and embedded research practices) and the translation of data streams and information in intuitive interfaces that make use of visualization, this research proposal seeks to specially gear technological developments and efforts to enhance society by closing the digital divide. By collaborating throughout the project with public, private and civic partners, the project foresees the accumulation of knowledge and a digital skilling of particular hitherto unreached civic groups.
These efforts should be viewed in line with two overarching developments in contemporary society and in humanities’ research; the move to create smart cities where citizens are digitally empowered and the development of digital humanities. By integrating the digital skilling of citizens with the agenda of the development of digital humanities, the project aims to perform cutting-edge academic research through a digital inclusion methodology/practice. Practically, the foreseen educational platform realizes local engagement, user-focused learning with both an individually-oriented as well as collective component; collaboration and the accumulation of knowledge and skills are key to a successful implementation of the platform.
Apart from a digital educational platform and the realization of a physical research space where public-private-civic partners can collaborate, a third component of the project is the translation of data in intuitive interfaces and data visualization. Students and researchers (“users”) will be taught to translate data into visualization, thereby not only learning how to interpret data, but also how to code and reflect on what coding practices mean; how the act of coding influences how data is represented. Users, in this way, become more aware of how data may be manipulated while at the same time gaining skills that empower the user. By learning how to read and handle data streams and how these may be translated in visualizations, users therefore not only gain skills, but also become more empowered, “smart” users.  

//The programming language the students are encouraged to learn first, JavaScript, has a low threshold for the parctical application of code in various fields. Here the students can also experiment with and apply their knowledge to existing open code resources. For execample in the field of visualization are board set of applications and programs already exsist that can be made productive for humanities research, like cartography, timelines, graphs, diagrams or animations. Here The students apply the knowledge gained early on by experimenting with existing JavaScript libraries such as Data Driven Documents [http://d3js.org/](http://d3js.org/) but still gain good control over the visual outcome. These tools enhance the analysis and understanding of complex relations and concepts relevant to humanities research. At the same time data sets become comprehensible and presentable to a broader audience. The developed tools can be applied to different data sets. Especially with regard to open data sets provided by more and more cultural institutions and organizations⁶, data visualization tools provide a great foundation for collaborative activities between universities and other institutions. These tools allow to exceed the mode of mere dataprocessing to the actual production of new insights and knowledge.//
