# Forbidden Gestures

The traditional exhibition setting is a spatial viewing arrangement
requiring distance, linear sequences and mobile spectators moving from
object to object. As a result of this static environment, there are
many details that the visitor easily overlooks. Especially since the
multiple layers of the artworks can only be accessed through intimate
acts that are traditionally forbidden: touching, zooming, tapping,
rearranging. 

Digitising the collection – in 2D photographic archives, databases
of information and 3D renderings – offers new ways to bypass these
restrictions. For that reason, it has become a common practice
to augment museums and exhibitions with virtual counterparts and
extensions. However, these digital collections often exist in a realm
that is completely isolated from their physical counterparts. In order
to reconnect these two realms new kinds of interfaces need to be
developed

Developing such interfaces, however, is a technological, an
institutional, as well as a theoretical challenge. How can data about
and around the artworks be integrated into the museum setting? What
kind of sensors and interfaces can be used to achieve this? How much
intrusion of technology do - understandably often conservate - musea
permit? How do the cultural techniques of intimate gestures - touch,
zooming, tapping, rearranging - affect the experience of visiting the
Rijksmuseum? What affordances of the digital can be employed to augment
the original artwords?

This research project aims at creating a theoretical framework,
formulating existing and desired features, testing user experience,
developing prototypes of new interfaces for virtual and physical
interaction in the museum context.
