#THE COLLECTION AS INTERFACE - VISUALIZATION / INCLUSION IN THE PROJECT

Collection as an interface: the exploration of the opportunities interfaces and visualization of data holds for knowledge production and inclusion THIS IS THE THIRD PILLAR OF THE PROJECT: COLLECTION AS INTERFACE

INCLUSION – COLLECTION HUMANITIES ACADEMIA- VISUALIZATION
INCLUSION – COLLECTION CIVIC ENGAGEMENT WITH COLLECTIONS AND VISUALIZATIONS/INTERFACES

As Chinn and Fairly have shown in their cross country analysis on digital divide (Chinn and Fairly, 2004 ADD REFERENCE!!IIS THERE A MORE RECENT STUDY ABOUT THIS?) there are not only dramatic geographic differences in accessibility to and user skills of ICT but also socio-economic and demographic gaps. Vast societal groups face the problem of digitally exclusion. Accessibility to and digital literacy about ICTs determine whether a person is included into economic, social and cultural life, and whether they can participate in decision making processes within the democratic realm. In other words using and comprehending ICT is about agency and inclusion. With regard to the growing impact of ICT not only on economic productivity but also within the cultural, social and political realm, this exclusion forms a challenge in terms of equality, inclusion and chances of participation.

One area in which the challenge of digital literacy and exclusion is prominent, is within humanities research. Academia is increasingly confronted with large amounts of data. In order to turn this data into information and into knowledge, researchers and students need tools that allow to structure, search, correlate, analyze but most importantly present and visualize this data. This is also true for working fields related to the humanities: museums, libraries and archives are challenged to make the huge data sets that result from digitalization of the cultural heritage they foster //opencultuur.nl//, accessible and understandable for as many people as possible. Despite the opportunities these mass resources generated in numerous digitization projects provide, humanities researchers and students are – due to a lack of skills - reluctant to exploit these troves.

//"While digital resources are becoming more visible in the humanities, use of these resources by scholars remains limited. … Digitization projects are bringing texts, data sources, sound, and images to the scholar’s desktop; however, the functions on which research in the humanities depend are neither well understood nor well supported by librarians."// (Brockman et al, 2001) / Bradley Text

At the same time, governments, municipalities and cultural institutions increasingly share their data openly online. The skills to compile graspable information from big data sets become more important on the level of politics and social agency. It allows civic movements but also single citizens to understand political and social processes, identify problems and develop solutions – that can be software based. //gelt project // white house data // open knowledge foundation//.

Coding the Humanities trains students and researchers to read and handle data streams and shows possible ways to translate these into visualizations. Visualizations such as cartography, timelines, graphs, diagrams or animations, as well as the design of interactive interfaces help to translate data into knowledge by providing a context for different information and a combination of different data sets. This approach can boost humanities research and at the same time it makes humanities concepts and research productive and understandable for a broader audience as the visual translation of the data can inspire the mind to new insights.

In practice, the choice is made to encourage researchers to first learn to program in JavaScript; JavaScript has a low threshold for the practical application of code in various fields. Here the researchers can also experiment with and apply their knowledge to existing open code resources. In addition to this, existing visualization applications and programs - such as cartography, timelines, graphs, diagrams or animations - are made available to humanities’ researchers. Combining newly developed JavaScript coding skills with enhanced visualization applications literacy, allows humanities’ researchers to elicit new knowledge and scientific insights by experimenting with existing JavaScript libraries such as Data Driven Documents http://d3js.org/ while they at the same time gain good control over the visual outcome of their research endeavors. These tools thus enhance the analysis and understanding of complex relations and concepts relevant to humanities’ research. At the same time data sets become comprehensible and presentable to a broader audience. Supported by private partners in the consortium, researchers will also develop new tools that may be applied to different open data sets, provided by cultural institutions and organizations⁶. 

The developed tools can be applied to different data sets. Especially with regard to the above mentioned open data sets provided by more and more cultural institutions and organizations, data visualization tools provide a great foundation for collaborative activities between universities and other institutions. These tools allow to exceed the mode of mere data processing to the actual production of new insights and knowledge.

Practically, the foreseen educational platform realizes local engagement, user-focused learning with both an individually-oriented as well as collective component; collaboration and the accumulation of knowledge and skills are key to a successful implementation of the platform. Apart from a digital educational platform and the realization of a physical research space where public-private-civic partners can collaborate, a third component of the project is the translation of data in intuitive interfaces and data visualization. Students and researchers (“users”) will be taught to translate data into visualization, thereby not only learning how to interpret data, but also how to code and reflect on what coding practices mean; how the act of coding influences how data is represented. Users, in this way, become more aware of how data may be manipulated while at the same time gaining skills that empower the user. By learning how to read and handle data streams and how these may be translated in visualizations, users therefore not only gain skills, but also become more empowered, “smart” users. Moreover, data visualization tools provide a great foundation for collaborative activities between universities and other institutions; these tools move beyond the mode of mere data processing to instead produce new insights and knowledge.

INCLUSION – COLLECTION CIVIC ENGAGEMENT WITH COLLECTIONS AND VISUALIZATIONS/INTERFACES
In this research field we will combine visualization and interface expertise of private partners to facilitate and realize skilling of humanities’ researchers. In addition to this, the consortium is complemented by open data collections provided by museums which provide research material for humanities researchers to interact with.
Apart from working to skill humanities’ researchers within the project, a second relevant aspect of the project is the realization of an artistic exhibition of research results in public space. The realization of visualization skills and practices, culminating in new insights for researchers and private partners, will be presented and disseminated during an event organized in public space in Vienna. During this event, the citizens of Vienna can themselves engage with interfaces, and visualizations which are the result of researchers’ efforts in researching open data provided by cultural institutions.

